Albeck, J. G., G. B. Mills, et al. (2013). "Frequency-modulated pulses of ERK activity transmit quantitative proliferation signals." Mol Cell 49(2): 249-261.

The EGF-stimulated ERK/MAPK pathway is a key conduit for cellular proliferation signals and a therapeutic target in many cancers. Here, we characterize two central quantitative aspects of this pathway: the mechanism by which signal strength is encoded and the response curve relating signal output to proliferation. Under steady-state conditions, we find that ERK is activated in discrete, asynchronous pulses with frequency and duration determined by extracellular concentrations of EGF spanning the physiological range. In genetically identical sister cells, cell-to-cell variability in pulse dynamics influences the decision to enter S phase. While targeted inhibition of EGFR reduces the frequency of ERK activity pulses, inhibition of MEK reduces their amplitude. Continuous response curves measured in multiple cell lines reveal that proliferation is effectively silenced only when ERK pathway output falls below a threshold of ~10%, indicating that high-dose targeting of the pathway is necessary to achieve therapeutic efficacy.

Ashburner, M., C. A. Ball, et al. (2000). "Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium." Nat Genet 25(1): 25-29.

Batchelor, E., A. Loewer, et al. (2009). "The ups and downs of p53: understanding protein dynamics in single cells." Nat Rev Cancer 9(5): 371-377.

Cells living in a complex environment must constantly detect, process and appropriately respond to changing signals. Therefore, all cellular information processing is dynamic in nature. As a consequence, understanding the process of signal transduction often requires detailed quantitative analysis of dynamic behaviours. Here, we focus on the oscillatory dynamics of the tumour suppressor protein p53 as a model for studying protein dynamics in single cells to better understand its regulation and function.

Berger, S. I., J. M. Posner, et al. (2007). "Genes2Networks: connecting lists of gene symbols using mammalian protein interactions databases." BMC Bioinformatics 8: 372.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, mammalian protein-protein interaction network databases have been developed. The interactions in these databases are either extracted manually from low-throughput experimental biomedical research literature, extracted automatically from literature using techniques such as natural language processing (NLP), generated experimentally using high-throughput methods such as yeast-2-hybrid screens, or interactions are predicted using an assortment of computational approaches. Genes or proteins identified as significantly changing in proteomic experiments, or identified as susceptibility disease genes in genomic studies, can be placed in the context of protein interaction networks in order to assign these genes and proteins to pathways and protein complexes. RESULTS: Genes2Networks is a software system that integrates the content of ten mammalian interaction network datasets. Filtering techniques to prune low-confidence interactions were implemented. Genes2Networks is delivered as a web-based service using AJAX. The system can be used to extract relevant subnetworks created from "seed" lists of human Entrez gene symbols. The output includes a dynamic linkable three color web-based network map, with a statistical analysis report that identifies significant intermediate nodes used to connect the seed list. CONCLUSION: Genes2Networks is powerful web-based software that can help experimental biologists to interpret lists of genes and proteins such as those commonly produced through genomic and proteomic experiments, as well as lists of genes and proteins associated with disease processes. This system can be used to find relationships between genes and proteins from seed lists, and predict additional genes or proteins that may play key roles in common pathways or protein complexes.

Birtwistle, M. R., J. Rauch, et al. (2012). "Emergence of bimodal cell population responses from the interplay between analog single-cell signaling and protein expression noise." BMC Syst Biol 6: 109.

BACKGROUND: Cell-to-cell variability in protein expression can be large, and its propagation through signaling networks affects biological outcomes. Here, we apply deterministic and probabilistic models and biochemical measurements to study how network topologies and cell-to-cell protein abundance variations interact to shape signaling responses. RESULTS: We observe bimodal distributions of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) responses to epidermal growth factor (EGF) stimulation, which are generally thought to indicate bistable or ultrasensitive signaling behavior in single cells. Surprisingly, we find that a simple MAPK/ERK-cascade model with negative feedback that displays graded, analog ERK responses at a single cell level can explain the experimentally observed bimodality at the cell population level. Model analysis suggests that a conversion of graded input-output responses in single cells to digital responses at the population level is caused by a broad distribution of ERK pathway activation thresholds brought about by cell-to-cell variability in protein expression. CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that bimodal signaling response distributions do not necessarily imply digital (ultrasensitive or bistable) single cell signaling, and the interplay between protein expression noise and network topologies can bring about digital population responses from analog single cell dose responses. Thus, cells can retain the benefits of robustness arising from negative feedback, while simultaneously generating population-level on/off responses that are thought to be critical for regulating cell fate decisions.

Chen, E. Y., C. M. Tan, et al. (2013). "Enrichr: interactive and collaborative HTML5 gene list enrichment analysis tool." BMC Bioinformatics 14: 128.

BACKGROUND: System-wide profiling of genes and proteins in mammalian cells produce lists of differentially expressed genes/proteins that need to be further analyzed for their collective functions in order to extract new knowledge. Once unbiased lists of genes or proteins are generated from such experiments, these lists are used as input for computing enrichment with existing lists created from prior knowledge organized into gene-set libraries. While many enrichment analysis tools and gene-set libraries databases have been developed, there is still room for improvement. RESULTS: Here, we present Enrichr, an integrative web-based and mobile software application that includes new gene-set libraries, an alternative approach to rank enriched terms, and various interactive visualization approaches to display enrichment results using the JavaScript library, Data Driven Documents (D3). The software can also be embedded into any tool that performs gene list analysis. We applied Enrichr to analyze nine cancer cell lines by comparing their enrichment signatures to the enrichment signatures of matched normal tissues. We observed a common pattern of up regulation of the polycomb group PRC2 and enrichment for the histone mark H3K27me3 in many cancer cell lines, as well as alterations in Toll-like receptor and interlukin signaling in K562 cells when compared with normal myeloid CD33+ cells. Such analyses provide global visualization of critical differences between normal tissues and cancer cell lines but can be applied to many other scenarios. CONCLUSIONS: Enrichr is an easy to use intuitive enrichment analysis web-based tool providing various types of visualization summaries of collective functions of gene lists. Enrichr is open source and freely available online at: http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/Enrichr.

Chen, E. Y., H. Xu, et al. (2012). "Expression2Kinases: mRNA profiling linked to multiple upstream regulatory layers." Bioinformatics 28(1): 105-111.

MOTIVATION: Genome-wide mRNA profiling provides a snapshot of the global state of cells under different conditions. However, mRNA levels do not provide direct understanding of upstream regulatory mechanisms. Here, we present a new approach called Expression2Kinases (X2K) to identify upstream regulators likely responsible for observed patterns in genome-wide gene expression. By integrating chromatin immuno-precipitation (ChIP)-seq/chip and position weight matrices (PWMs) data, protein-protein interactions and kinase-substrate phosphorylation reactions, we can better identify regulatory mechanisms upstream of genome-wide differences in gene expression. We validated X2K by applying it to recover drug targets of food and drug administration (FDA)-approved drugs from drug perturbations followed by mRNA expression profiling; to map the regulatory landscape of 44 stem cells and their differentiating progeny; to profile upstream regulatory mechanisms of 327 breast cancer tumors; and to detect pathways from profiled hepatic stellate cells and hippocampal neurons. The X2K approach can advance our understanding of cell signaling and unravel drugs mechanisms of action. AVAILABILITY: The software and source code are freely available at: http://www.maayanlab.net/X2K. CONTACT: avi.maayan@mssm.edu SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online.

Cohen-Saidon, C., A. A. Cohen, et al. (2009). "Dynamics and variability of ERK2 response to EGF in individual living cells." Mol Cell 36(5): 885-893.

Signal-transduction cascades are usually studied on cell averages, masking variability between individual cells. To address this, we studied in individual cells the dynamic response of ERK2, a well-characterized MAPK signaling protein, which enters the nucleus upon stimulation. Using fluorescent tagging at the endogenous chromosomal locus, we found that cells show wide basal variation in ERK2 nuclear levels. Upon EGF stimulation, cells show (1) a fold-change response, where peak nuclear accumulation of ERK2 is proportional to basal level in each cell; and (2) exact adaptation in nuclear levels of ERK2, returning to original basal level of each cell. The timing of ERK2 dynamics is more precise between cells than its amplitude. We further found that in some cells ERK2 exhibits a second pulse of nuclear entry, smaller than the first. The present study suggests that this signaling system compensates for natural biological noise: despite large variation in nuclear basal levels, ERK2's fold dynamics is similar between cells.

Cohen, A. A., N. Geva-Zatorsky, et al. (2008). "Dynamic proteomics of individual cancer cells in response to a drug." Science 322(5907): 1511-1516.

Why do seemingly identical cells respond differently to a drug? To address this, we studied the dynamics and variability of the protein response of human cancer cells to a chemotherapy drug, camptothecin. We present a dynamic-proteomics approach that measures the levels and locations of nearly 1000 different endogenously tagged proteins in individual living cells at high temporal resolution. All cells show rapid translocation of proteins specific to the drug mechanism, including the drug target (topoisomerase-1), and slower, wide-ranging temporal waves of protein degradation and accumulation. However, the cells differ in the behavior of a subset of proteins. We identify proteins whose dynamics differ widely between cells, in a way that corresponds to the outcomes-cell death or survival. This opens the way to understanding molecular responses to drugs in individual cells.

Ferrell, J. E., Jr. and E. M. Machleder (1998). "The biochemical basis of an all-or-none cell fate switch in Xenopus oocytes." Science 280(5365): 895-898.

Xenopus oocytes convert a continuously variable stimulus, the concentration of the maturation-inducing hormone progesterone, into an all-or-none biological response-oocyte maturation. Here evidence is presented that the all-or-none character of the response is generated by the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) cascade. Analysis of individual oocytes showed that the response of MAPK to progesterone or Mos was equivalent to that of a cooperative enzyme with a Hill coefficient of at least 35, more than 10 times the Hill coefficient for the binding of oxygen to hemoglobin. The response can be accounted for by the intrinsic ultrasensitivity of the oocyte's MAPK cascade and a positive feedback loop in which the cascade is embedded. These findings provide a biochemical rationale for the all-or-none character of this cell fate switch.

Jin, Y., K. Ratnam, et al. (2012). "A systems approach identifies HIPK2 as a key regulator of kidney fibrosis." Nat Med 18(4): 580-588.

Kidney fibrosis is a common process that leads to the progression of various types of kidney disease. We used an integrated computational and experimental systems biology approach to identify protein kinases that regulate gene expression changes in the kidneys of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) transgenic mice (Tg26 mice), which have both tubulointerstitial fibrosis and glomerulosclerosis. We identified homeo-domain interacting protein kinase 2 (HIPK2) as a key regulator of kidney fibrosis. HIPK2 was upregulated in the kidneys of Tg26 mice and in those of patients with various kidney diseases. HIV infection increased the protein concentrations of HIPK2 by promoting oxidative stress, which inhibited the seven in absentia homolog 1 (SIAH1)-mediated proteasomal degradation of HIPK2. HIPK2 induced apoptosis and the expression of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition markers in kidney epithelial cells by activating the p53, transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta)-SMAD family member 3 (Smad3) and Wnt-Notch pathways. Knockout of HIPK2 improved renal function and attenuated proteinuria and kidney fibrosis in Tg26 mice, as well as in other murine models of kidney fibrosis. We therefore conclude that HIPK2 is a potential target for anti-fibrosis therapy.

Lachmann, A. and A. Ma'ayan (2009). "KEA: kinase enrichment analysis." Bioinformatics 25(5): 684-686.

MOTIVATION: Multivariate experiments applied to mammalian cells often produce lists of proteins/genes altered under treatment versus control conditions. Such lists can be projected onto prior knowledge of kinase-substrate interactions to infer the list of kinases associated with a specific protein list. By computing how the proportion of kinases, associated with a specific list of proteins/genes, deviates from an expected distribution, we can rank kinases and kinase families based on the likelihood that these kinases are functionally associated with regulating the cell under specific experimental conditions. Such analysis can assist in producing hypotheses that can explain how the kinome is involved in the maintenance of different cellular states and can be manipulated to modulate cells towards a desired phenotype. SUMMARY: Kinase enrichment analysis (KEA) is a web-based tool with an underlying database providing users with the ability to link lists of mammalian proteins/genes with the kinases that phosphorylate them. The system draws from several available kinase-substrate databases to compute kinase enrichment probability based on the distribution of kinase-substrate proportions in the background kinase-substrate database compared with kinases found to be associated with an input list of genes/proteins. AVAILABILITY: The KEA system is freely available at http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/lib/kea.jsp

Lachmann, A., H. Xu, et al. (2010). "ChEA: transcription factor regulation inferred from integrating genome-wide ChIP-X experiments." Bioinformatics 26(19): 2438-2444.

MOTIVATION: Experiments such as ChIP-chip, ChIP-seq, ChIP-PET and DamID (the four methods referred herein as ChIP-X) are used to profile the binding of transcription factors to DNA at a genome-wide scale. Such experiments provide hundreds to thousands of potential binding sites for a given transcription factor in proximity to gene coding regions. RESULTS: In order to integrate data from such studies and utilize it for further biological discovery, we collected interactions from such experiments to construct a mammalian ChIP-X database. The database contains 189,933 interactions, manually extracted from 87 publications, describing the binding of 92 transcription factors to 31,932 target genes. We used the database to analyze mRNA expression data where we perform gene-list enrichment analysis using the ChIP-X database as the prior biological knowledge gene-list library. The system is delivered as a web-based interactive application called ChIP Enrichment Analysis (ChEA). With ChEA, users can input lists of mammalian gene symbols for which the program computes over-representation of transcription factor targets from the ChIP-X database. The ChEA database allowed us to reconstruct an initial network of transcription factors connected based on shared overlapping targets and binding site proximity. To demonstrate the utility of ChEA we present three case studies. We show how by combining the Connectivity Map (CMAP) with ChEA, we can rank pairs of compounds to be used to target specific transcription factor activity in cancer cells. AVAILABILITY: The ChEA software and ChIP-X database is freely available online at: http://amp.pharm.mssm.edu/lib/chea.jsp.

Lahav, G., N. Rosenfeld, et al. (2004). "Dynamics of the p53-Mdm2 feedback loop in individual cells." Nat Genet 36(2): 147-150.

The tumor suppressor p53, one of the most intensely investigated proteins, is usually studied by experiments that are averaged over cell populations, potentially masking the dynamic behavior in individual cells. We present a system for following, in individual living cells, the dynamics of p53 and its negative regulator Mdm2 (refs. 1,4-7): this system uses functional p53-CFP and Mdm2-YFP fusion proteins and time-lapse fluorescence microscopy. We found that p53 was expressed in a series of discrete pulses after DNA damage. Genetically identical cells had different numbers of pulses: zero, one, two or more. The mean height and duration of each pulse were fixed and did not depend on the amount of DNA damage. The mean number of pulses, however, increased with DNA damage. This approach can be used to study other signaling systems and suggests that the p53-Mdm2 feedback loop generates a 'digital' clock that releases well-timed quanta of p53 until damage is repaired or the cell dies.

Mootha, V. K., C. M. Lindgren, et al. (2003). "PGC-1alpha-responsive genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation are coordinately downregulated in human diabetes." Nat Genet 34(3): 267-273.

DNA microarrays can be used to identify gene expression changes characteristic of human disease. This is challenging, however, when relevant differences are subtle at the level of individual genes. We introduce an analytical strategy, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, designed to detect modest but coordinate changes in the expression of groups of functionally related genes. Using this approach, we identify a set of genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation whose expression is coordinately decreased in human diabetic muscle. Expression of these genes is high at sites of insulin-mediated glucose disposal, activated by PGC-1alpha and correlated with total-body aerobic capacity. Our results associate this gene set with clinically important variation in human metabolism and illustrate the value of pathway relationships in the analysis of genomic profiling experiments.

Spencer, S. L., S. Gaudet, et al. (2009). "Non-genetic origins of cell-to-cell variability in TRAIL-induced apoptosis." Nature 459(7245): 428-432.

In microorganisms, noise in gene expression gives rise to cell-to-cell variability in protein concentrations. In mammalian cells, protein levels also vary and individual cells differ widely in their responsiveness to uniform physiological stimuli. In the case of apoptosis mediated by TRAIL (tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-related apoptosis-inducing ligand) it is common for some cells in a clonal population to die while others survive-a striking divergence in cell fate. Among cells that die, the time between TRAIL exposure and caspase activation is highly variable. Here we image sister cells expressing reporters of caspase activation and mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization after exposure to TRAIL. We show that naturally occurring differences in the levels or states of proteins regulating receptor-mediated apoptosis are the primary causes of cell-to-cell variability in the timing and probability of death in human cell lines. Protein state is transmitted from mother to daughter, giving rise to transient heritability in fate, but protein synthesis promotes rapid divergence so that sister cells soon become no more similar to each other than pairs of cells chosen at random. Our results have implications for understanding 'fractional killing' of tumour cells after exposure to chemotherapy, and for variability in mammalian signal transduction in general.

Subramanian, A., P. Tamayo, et al. (2005). "Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102(43): 15545-15550.

Although genomewide RNA expression analysis has become a routine tool in biomedical research, extracting biological insight from such information remains a major challenge. Here, we describe a powerful analytical method called Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) for interpreting gene expression data. The method derives its power by focusing on gene sets, that is, groups of genes that share common biological function, chromosomal location, or regulation. We demonstrate how GSEA yields insights into several cancer-related data sets, including leukemia and lung cancer. Notably, where single-gene analysis finds little similarity between two independent studies of patient survival in lung cancer, GSEA reveals many biological pathways in common. The GSEA method is embodied in a freely available software package, together with an initial database of 1,325 biologically defined gene sets.

Zhong, Y., E. Y. Chen, et al. (2013). "Renoprotective effect of combined inhibition of angiotensin-converting enzyme and histone deacetylase." J Am Soc Nephrol 24(5): 801-811.

The Connectivity Map database contains microarray signatures of gene expression derived from approximately 6000 experiments that examined the effects of approximately 1300 single drugs on several human cancer cell lines. We used these data to prioritize pairs of drugs expected to reverse the changes in gene expression observed in the kidneys of a mouse model of HIV-associated nephropathy (Tg26 mice). We predicted that the combination of an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor and a histone deacetylase inhibitor would maximally reverse the disease-associated expression of genes in the kidneys of these mice. Testing the combination of these inhibitors in Tg26 mice revealed an additive renoprotective effect, as suggested by reduction of proteinuria, improvement of renal function, and attenuation of kidney injury. Furthermore, we observed the predicted treatment-associated changes in the expression of selected genes and pathway components. In summary, these data suggest that the combination of an ACE inhibitor and a histone deacetylase inhibitor could have therapeutic potential for various kidney diseases. In addition, this study provides proof-of-concept that drug-induced expression signatures have potential use in predicting the effects of combination drug therapy.
